w3c/README.md, before:

# W3C Spec Coverage

How apercue.ca CUE patterns map to W3C specifications.

Every entry below is a **zero-cost projection** of the same typed dependency graph.
No runtime infrastructure required --- `cue export -e <expression> --out json` produces
the standards-compliant output.

## Implemented

| W3C Spec | Status | CUE Pattern | File | Export Expression |
|----------|--------|-------------|------|-------------------|
| **JSON-LD 1.1** | @context, @type, @id | All resources | `vocab/context.cue` | `cue export -e context` |
| **SHACL** | sh:ValidationReport | `#ComplianceCheck.shacl_report` | `patterns/validation.cue` | `cue export -e compliance.shacl_report` |
| **SHACL** | sh:ValidationReport | `#GapAnalysis.shacl_report` | `charter/charter.cue` | `cue export -e gaps.shacl_report` |
| **SKOS** | skos:ConceptScheme | `#LifecyclePhasesSKOS` | `patterns/lifecycle.cue` | `cue export -e lifecycle_skos` |
| **SKOS** | skos:ConceptScheme | `#TypeVocabulary` | `views/skos.cue` | `cue export -e type_vocab` |
| **EARL** | earl:Assertion | `#SmokeTest.earl_report` | `patterns/lifecycle.cue` | `cue export -e smoke.earl_report` |
| **OWL-Time** | time:Interval | `#CriticalPath.time_report` | `patterns/analysis.cue` | `cue export -e cpm.time_report` |
| **Dublin Core** | dcterms:requires | Namespace in @context | `vocab/context.cue` | N/A (namespace prefix) |
| **PROV-O** | prov:wasDerivedFrom | Namespace in @context | `vocab/context.cue` | N/A (namespace prefix) |
| **schema.org** | schema:actionStatus | Lifecycle status values | `vocab/context.cue` | N/A (namespace prefix) |

## Downstream (in quicue.ca)

| W3C Spec | Pattern | Description |
|----------|---------|-------------|
| **Hydra Core** | `#HydraApiDoc` | hydra:ApiDocumentation in quicue.ca operator dashboard |
| **DCAT 3** | `#DCATCatalog` | dcat:Catalog in quicue-kg aggregate module |

## How It Works

The traditional semantic web stack requires:

```
Data → RDF Store → SPARQL Queries → SHACL Validator → JSON-LD Serializer
```

apercue.ca collapses this to:

```
Data → cue export -e <projection>
```

CUE comprehensions precompute all queries at evaluation time. CUE unification
enforces all shapes at constraint resolution time. The W3C artifacts are
different views of the same typed graph, not separate processing stages.

## References

- [JSON-LD 1.1](https://www.w3.org/TR/json-ld11/) — W3C Recommendation
- [SHACL](https://www.w3.org/TR/shacl/) — W3C Recommendation
- [SKOS](https://www.w3.org/TR/skos-reference/) — W3C Recommendation
- [EARL](https://www.w3.org/TR/EARL10-Schema/) — W3C Note
- [OWL-Time](https://www.w3.org/TR/owl-time/) — W3C Recommendation
- [DCAT 3](https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-dcat-3/) — W3C Recommendation
- [ODRL 2.2](https://www.w3.org/TR/odrl-model/) — W3C Recommendation
- [Hydra Core](https://www.hydra-cg.com/spec/latest/core/) — W3C Community Group

Commit message:

Implement review findings: spec examples, Dublin Core upgrade, self-charter
- Add SKOS and EARL example sections to spec with CUE input/output pairs
- Add CUE input blocks to existing SHACL and OWL-Time spec examples
- Upgrade Dublin Core from Namespace to Implemented (5→6 implemented specs)
- Add self-charter to README examples table with charter.html link
- Add spec link to README Live bar and SHACL output preview to Quick Start
- Update PROV-O and DCAT descriptions with downstream projection details
- Accept ADR-009, ADR-010, ADR-011 (were proposed, now implemented)

w3c/README.md, after:

# W3C Spec Coverage

How apercue.ca CUE patterns map to W3C specifications.

Every entry below is a **zero-cost projection** of the same typed dependency graph.
No runtime infrastructure required --- `cue export -e <expression> --out json` produces
the standards-compliant output.

## Implemented

| W3C Spec | Status | CUE Pattern | File | Export Expression |
|----------|--------|-------------|------|-------------------|
| **JSON-LD 1.1** | @context, @type, @id | All resources | `vocab/context.cue` | `cue export -e context` |
| **SHACL** | sh:ValidationReport | `#ComplianceCheck.shacl_report` | `patterns/validation.cue` | `cue export -e compliance.shacl_report` |
| **SHACL** | sh:ValidationReport | `#GapAnalysis.shacl_report` | `charter/charter.cue` | `cue export -e gaps.shacl_report` |
| **SKOS** | skos:ConceptScheme | `#LifecyclePhasesSKOS` | `patterns/lifecycle.cue` | `cue export -e lifecycle_skos` |
| **SKOS** | skos:ConceptScheme | `#TypeVocabulary` | `views/skos.cue` | `cue export -e type_vocab` |
| **EARL** | earl:Assertion | `#SmokeTest.earl_report` | `patterns/lifecycle.cue` | `cue export -e smoke.earl_report` |
| **OWL-Time** | time:Interval | `#CriticalPath.time_report` | `patterns/analysis.cue` | `cue export -e cpm.time_report` |
| **Dublin Core** | dcterms:requires, dcterms:title, dcterms:conformsTo | Every depends_on edge, resource name, and conformance link in SHACL/EARL reports | `vocab/context.cue` | Structural — present in all JSON-LD output |
| **PROV-O** | prov:wasDerivedFrom | Namespace in @context; full prov_report projections in quicue.ca | `vocab/context.cue` | N/A (namespace prefix) |
| **schema.org** | schema:actionStatus | Lifecycle status values | `vocab/context.cue` | N/A (namespace prefix) |

## Downstream (in quicue.ca)

| W3C Spec | Pattern | Description |
|----------|---------|-------------|
| **Hydra Core** | `#HydraApiDoc` | hydra:ApiDocumentation in quicue.ca operator dashboard |
| **DCAT 3** | `#DCAT3Catalog`, `#DCATKnowledgeBase` | dcat:Catalog, dcat:Dataset — full catalog and .kb/ projections in quicue.ca |

## How It Works

The traditional semantic web stack requires:

```
Data → RDF Store → SPARQL Queries → SHACL Validator → JSON-LD Serializer
```

apercue.ca collapses this to:

```
Data → cue export -e <projection>
```

CUE comprehensions precompute all queries at evaluation time. CUE unification
enforces all shapes at constraint resolution time. The W3C artifacts are
different views of the same typed graph, not separate processing stages.

## References

- [JSON-LD 1.1](https://www.w3.org/TR/json-ld11/) — W3C Recommendation
- [SHACL](https://www.w3.org/TR/shacl/) — W3C Recommendation
- [SKOS](https://www.w3.org/TR/skos-reference/) — W3C Recommendation
- [EARL](https://www.w3.org/TR/EARL10-Schema/) — W3C Note
- [OWL-Time](https://www.w3.org/TR/owl-time/) — W3C Recommendation
- [DCAT 3](https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-dcat-3/) — W3C Recommendation
- [ODRL 2.2](https://www.w3.org/TR/odrl-model/) — W3C Recommendation
- [Hydra Core](https://www.hydra-cg.com/spec/latest/core/) — W3C Community Group
